---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Foundations
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2021-04-27
labels:
  - Design Patterns
  - Reflection
---

## Pokémon? No Wait...

Have you ever played a role playing game in your childhood that involved many characters of your choosing? Maybe a game like Pokémon? There are endless possibilities of choosing a combination of characters, or in this case, Pokémon parties, that can lead to the final goal. All of those infinite possibilities are neither right nor wrong, as only the player can bring out the effectiveness within each and every one of those options. Specifically in software engineering, there are usually multiple techniques in solving a problem, commonly referred to as design patterns. All of the possible Pokémon parties you can choose resembles all of the possible design patterns a programmer can use to help them develop software. Each design pattern may have their strengths and weaknesses, but ultimately there are no right or wrong answers; it all depends on how the developer integrates these different design patterns that makes the final product successful. 

Utilizing design patterns provides many benefits while coding. They are essentially the foundations of your code that connect and hold everything together. In short, design patterns are templates to solve common problems within software development. 

## Implementations

Throughout my entire life as a Pokémon trainer, catching Pokémon and forming powerful parties… wait wrong topic. Let’s start again. Throughout my entire career as a computer engineering student, getting exposed to design patterns when I didn't even know it, I have implemented some of them in the coding assignments and projects I have done. Some of these design pattern implementations include singleton and observer. 

The singleton design pattern is used in object-oriented programming that only allows exactly one instance of a class that can be accessed globally. This is extremely useful because this essentially means we can create a “server” where computers are able to read and write information into this server, as it is unique and no other server exists with the exact IP address and credentials. This was implemented in my software engineering web project, which utilized a database of unique collections that can be accessed and altered across the website. The “server” is the collection, and the “computers” that are able to access this server are the different pages on the site. One example of a collection would be the list of music jams. There is only one instance of this collection which can be accessed and altered by multiple pages, including the ability to view the list of jams in the collection, editing jams, or adding jams.

The observer design pattern has the ability to detect any immediate changes of an object and updates any dependencies automatically. This pattern can be useful as it reduces the need for a user to manually refresh or update dependencies. A good example of this is a search bar on a website. It will be incredibly inconvenient if a user has to input a keyword into the search bar, submit the field, then manually refresh the page. In my software engineering web project, the observer pattern reduces the need to manually refresh the page. But wait! It even reduces the need to click on a button to submit the search field! The user simply has to type a character into the search field and the observer automatically updates the page after each input. 

## From the Beginning

Truthfully, I have actually been utilizing design patterns since I started programming several years ago but I never knew about it! This truly shows that in the field of software engineering, design patterns are always available to us which makes solving coding problems much easier. They have always been the foundation that built us into software developers today.
