---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: A Room of Code
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2021-02-04
labels:
  - Software Engineering
  - JavaScript
  - ESLint
  - Reflection
---

Do you like cleaning your room? Well, I do not really enjoy cleaning, but I do it anyway. A messy room bothers me as it gets harder to locate certain things. Much like our rooms, messy code should also be cleaned to make it less of an eyesore. 

It is a good habit to practice clean coding standards in the case that you or some other person were to look back at the code a few days, a month, or even several years later. It will be much easier to trace the code if there are proper indentations and brackets enclosing parts of the code. In the long run, it will save a lot of time for debugging and completing large-scaled projects. For example, consider these two functions below:

```js
/* ---------------- Function 1 ---------------- */
function foo() {
  let a=1, b=2, c=3;
  if(a==b)
    return "test";
  else
    return "test2";
}

/* ---------------- Function 2 ---------------- */
function bar() {
  const a = 1;
  const b = 2;
  if (a === 2) {
    return 'test';
  }
  return 'test2';
}
```

While they produce the same output, the second function uses better coding standards. It is common for a lot of programmers to omit “unnecessary” braces for the sake of saving space like how it is shown in the first function. However, ESLint recommends to implement these braces as a clear way of what lines of code are enclosed in a specific function, if statement, while loop, and more. If a new programmer were to read a code, most of them would require braces to understand what the code does. Another poor habit a lot of programmers do is to initialize variables all in one line. While it does work, it can be difficult to trace later on since the variables are squeezed into one line. Line spacing can also make code easier to read because it reduces the eyesore. For example, including spaces in between operators looks much more appealing than having the variables, operators, and/or numbers all merged together. Practicing effective coding standards can also be a way of understanding the programming language. ESLint helps in understanding the difference in using certain conventions, such as using “let” vs. “const” or using a double equal vs. a triple equal operation. 

With the transition from using Eclipse, to Visual Studio Code, to a linux terminal, and now to IntelliJ, it has been difficult to adapt to new IDEs. With the addition of ESLint, my programming experience feels different to what I am used to because of all the warnings it gives denouncing my poor coding habits. I can no longer take “shortcuts” in my code as I have to follow proper coding standards. While I felt that this was annoying at first, I believe it is a beneficial tool that helps me become a better programmer in the future when I start working on larger projects that require good organization. I was surprised by the amount of errors ESLint detected in my code because I have been writing code in that way for several years, like having an empty space after a “for” or “while” statement. 

I believe understanding proper coding standards should be practiced by all programmers to help not just yourself, but also to anyone who decides to read your code without ripping their hair out.

Okay I should clean my room now.
